REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN 2019 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN In the context of the Staff Report for the 2019 Article IV Consultation, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its September 6, 2019 consideration of the staff report on issues related to the Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Azerbaijan. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on September 6, 2019, following discussions that ended on June 27, 2019, with the officials of the Republic of Azerbaijan on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on August 20, 2019. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Azerbaijan. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy September 2019 Press Release No. 19/341 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE September 18, 2019 IMF Executive Board Concludes 2019 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Azerbaijan concluded the Article IV consultation1 with the Republic of Azerbaijan. The economy is continuing to recover from a banking crisis and recession. Real GDP growth reached 1.4 percent in 2018 and 2.4 percent in the first half of 2019, supported by increases in natural gas production and activity in the services sector. Higher oil prices have helped improve internal and external balances. Lower food prices and a stable exchange rate have kept inflation subdued, below the midpoint of the target band (4±2 percent). With inflation expectations well anchored and the fiscal position strengthening, the Central Bank of Azerbaijan has started to ease monetary policy. The business environment has been improving as bank lending and manat deposits have picked up. Looking ahead, economic growth is expected to reach 2.7 percent in 2019 on strong hydrocarbon production and robust domestic demand, benefitting from new spending measures. In the medium term, economic growth is projected to settle at 2½ percent, as hydrocarbon expansion stabilizes at about 1¼ percent, and nonoil growth gradually rises above 3 percent. Inflation should remain under control, given low projected food price inflation and continued fiscal consolidation envisaged under a new fiscal rule. With oil prices expected to hover around $60 per barrel, the current account surplus is forecasted to remain sizeable. Public debt is set to decline relative to the size of the economy. Challenges remain, however, including fragilities in bank balance sheets, structural rigidities, governance weaknesses, and lack of transparency. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside, but Azerbaijan has room to respond to adverse shocks, given its strong net foreign asset position. 1 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. 700 19th Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA Executive Board Assessment2 Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. With the economy recovering from a banking crisis and a prolonged downturn, they commended the authorities for their policy response to the recent economic challenges. Going forward, Directors encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts to diversify the economy, raise its potential, and improve its resilience to shocks. They also emphasized the importance of economic inclusiveness and sharing the exhaustible hydrocarbon wealth with future generations. Directors saw continued fiscal adjustment as necessary for ensuring long term debt sustainability and intergenerational equity. To mitigate the impact on economic growth, they recommended that fiscal consolidation proceed at a gradual pace and rely primarily on mobilizing nonoil revenues, improving the efficiency of public spending, reforming SOEs, and better targeting transfers and subsidies. While welcoming the introduction of a fiscal rule, Directors recognized that recent spending packages make compliance with the fiscal rule challenging. In this context, they underscored the importance of complementing the fiscal rule with stronger public financial management, greater fiscal transparency, and better management of fiscal risks. Given still tight financial conditions and economic slack, Directors broadly encouraged the authorities to continue normalizing monetary policy with a carefully calibrated and data driven approach based on incoming evidence about the impact of recent fiscal measures. They agreed that greater exchange rate flexibility would improve competitiveness, foster diversification, facilitate adjustment to shocks, and enhance risk management. Directors also encouraged the authorities to step up preparations for modernizing monetary and exchange rate policy operations and transitioning to an inflation targeting regime. Directors agreed that strengthening financial supervision and fostering competition in the banking sector is crucial for ensuring its health and enabling it to play an effective role in intermediating resources for economic growth. While recognizing that the recent program for nonperforming loan resolution is set to improve bank balance sheets, they expressed concern that the program risks worsening moral hazard and repayment culture. Directors encouraged the authorities to conduct an independent asset quality review, phase out regulatory forbearance, and improve transparency. Directors emphasized the importance of pressing ahead with structural reforms to foster diversified, private sector led and inclusive economic growth. In this context, they welcomed the 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. progress in improving the business environment and encouraged the authorities to make further efforts to reduce the economic footprint of the state and open the economy to greater international trade and investment. Directors also emphasized the importance of addressing governance weaknesses, including by strengthening the AML/CFT and anti-corruption frameworks. In addition, Directors stressed that better data and transparency would improve decision making, promote private sector participation, and reduce vulnerabilities to corruption. Azerbaijan: Selected Economic Indicators Population (2018 est.): 9.9 million Literacy/Poverty rates: 100.0 (2017)/5.4 (2017) Quota (in SDR million): 391.7 Per capita GDP (in US$, 2018): 4,742 Main products and exports: Oil, gas, and fruits. Key export markets: Italy, Indonesia, Germany Projections 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Output Real GDP growth (in percent) -3.1 -0.3 Real non-oil GDP growth (in percent) -4.9 Real oil GDP growth (in percent) -0.1 -4.4 Employment Unemployment rate (in percent) Prices Consumer price index (period average) 12.4 12.8 General government finances Revenue (including grants, in percent of GDP) 34.3 34.2 38.8 39.1 37.8 Expenditure (in percent of GDP) 35.4 35.6 33.1 34.7 34.4 Current expenditure 24.6 25.3 19.1 22.9 25.8 Capital spending and net lending 10.8 10.3 14.1 11.9 Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) -1.1 -1.4 Non-oil primary fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP) -26.7 -30.9 -32.1 -31.1 -30.0 General government gross debt (direct borrowing) 20.6 22.5 18.8 19.7 18.6 General government gross debt including guarantees 50.7 53.2 48.4 51.5 47.8 Money and credit Broad money (including foreign currency deposits, percentage change) -1.9 11.3 Bank credit to the private sector (percentage change) -24.1 -28.1 14.9 11.1 Balance of payments Current account balance (in percent of GDP) -3.6 12.9 10.0 Foreign direct investment (in percent of GDP) -1.7 Gross international reserves (in months of non-oil imports) Exchange rate REER (average, percentage change) -27.0 Sources: Azerbaijani authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2019 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY ISSUES Context: Azerbaijan is recovering from a banking crisis and recession caused by a prolonged decline in oil prices since mid-2014. Monetary conditions remain tight under a de facto peg. Despite rising government spending, the fiscal position is projected to strengthen in 2019 mainly due to firmer oil prices and improvements in revenue administration. Weaknesses in bank balance sheets, structural and policy rigidities, and institutional and governance deficiencies hinder medium-term growth prospects and weaken resilience to shocks. Main Policy Recommendations: • Gradual and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation is needed to strengthen intergenerational and precautionary buffers while mitigating the adverse impact on the economy. Consolidation could rely on prioritizing and improving the efficiency of spending, rationalizing tax policy, and improving revenue administration. The recently introduced fiscal rule needs to ensure spending discipline and reduce procyclicality. Monetary easing would complement fiscal consolidation. Greater exchange rate (ER) flexibility would facilitate adjustment to shocks and support diversification. • Promote inclusive, diversified, and private sector-led growth. Reducing administrative burden for businesses, encouraging competition, and strengthening governance and transparency would reduce the cost of doing business, foster entrepreneurship, and attract foreign capital. Prioritizing investment for healthcare and education, improving its efficiency, and better targeting of social protection would help nurture human capital and improve productivity. • Strengthen policy frameworks and institutions. Priorities include reforms in public financial and investment management, oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and governance, as well as fiscal accounting and transparency. Stronger financial regulation and supervision and modernization of monetary and foreign exchange (FX) operations are also needed. Addressing governance weaknesses is essential to reduce vulnerabilities to corruption. More integrated policies, along with better data availability, would support decision making and credibility, and attract investment. August 20, 2019