REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN 2021 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE; AND STAFF REPORT In the context of the Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV Consultation, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on a lapse of time basis, following discussions that ended on May 21, 2021, with the officials of the Republic of Azerbaijan on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on July 1, 2021. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy December 2021 PR21/402 IMF Executive Board Concludes 2021 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Azerbaijan FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation1 with Azerbaijan on a lapse of time basis. Azerbaijan was severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in oil prices, but a sizable relief package helped to cushion the economic impact of the shock. Real GDP declined by 4.3 percent in 2020, driven by a significant contraction in oil GDP, which fell by 7.2 percent, while nonoil GDP declined by 2.6 percent. With the de jure free floating exchange rate regime, the manat continued to be de facto pegged to the US dollar, and average consumer price inflation remained subdued, at below 3 percent. Oil export revenues fell by 40 percent and the current account balance moved from a 9 percent of GDP surplus in 2019 to a small deficit in 2020. The authorities responded to the crisis with a fiscal package of close to 5 percent of GDP, including emergency health spending, subsistence cash transfers to the unemployed, temporary public jobs, support to microentrepreneurs and deferral of some taxes. The fiscal package was complemented by financial sector measures, including loan guarantees and the temporary relaxation of capital and loan provisioning norms. As a result of increased spending and lower revenues, consolidated fiscal balance turned from a surplus of over 8 percent of GDP in 2019 to a deficit of 6.4 percent of GDP in 2020. Economic activity is projected to rebound in 2021, as the nonoil economy recovers from the pandemic. Nonoil GDP growth is projected to rise to 3.5 percent in 2021, before settling at 2.5 percent in the medium term. Hydrocarbon output is expected to remain stable as increased natural gas production is expected to offset declining productivity of aging oil fields. Inflation is expected to rise to 4 percent in 2021, remaining at 3 percent on average in the medium term. The current account is projected to return to a surplus of around 2.5 percent of GDP in 2021 as oil prices recover and natural gas exports rise and remain in a small surplus in the medium term. The outlook is subject to a high degree of uncertainty, with risks broadly balanced. A spread of more dangerous COVID-19 virus strains and/or a slowdown in the rollout of vaccines may delay the re- opening of the economy. Slower-than-expected recovery of global demand would also pose a risk to the oil sector. On the upside, a faster-than-expected global recovery could push oil and gas prices higher, boosting revenues and strengthening fiscal and external balances. With oil resources gradually being 1 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2021 discussions were carried out virtually. exhausted, accelerated structural reforms are needed to diversify the economy and improve productivity of the nonoil sector, strengthening Azerbaijan’s economic prospects. Executive Board Assessment2 In concluding the Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan, Executive Directors endorsed the staff’s appraisal as follows: Azerbaijan faced an unprecedented challenge in 2020, but timely and appropriate policy response mitigated the impact of the pandemic on the economy. A significant relief package helped cushion the impact of the pandemic and the decline in oil prices. With vaccination progressing and lockdown measures gradually eased, the economy has started to recover. The near-term challenge is to properly calibrate the phasing out of the COVID-19-related stimulus, balancing the need to avoid endangering the recovery while preparing the ground for addressing structural challenges. In the long term, Azerbaijan’s running out of oil in the coming decades poses the fundamental challenge as the economy needs to wean off its dependence on oil revenues. While fiscal policy has been appropriately eased during the pandemic, a growth-friendly fiscal consolidation needs to start in 2022. The accommodative fiscal stance in 2021 is appropriate and, in the case of adverse shocks, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate and additional, targeted on- budget fiscal support should be provided, as necessary, within the available fiscal space. Windfall revenue from higher-than-budgeted oil prices should be saved. Looking ahead, continued expansionary stance would not be compatible with preserving the de facto peg and fiscal sustainability and would also make it more difficult to attain intergenerational equity in the face of a projected exhaustion of oil resources. Thus, consolidation should start in 2022 and be sustained over the long term, to gradually achieve a significant reduction in the nonoil primary deficit. While the authorities see a key role for expenditure consolidation, measures to improve nonoil revenues will eventually have to contribute to adjustment. Consolidation needs to be accompanied by measures to protect the vulnerable and support education and health, with a view to enhancing inclusiveness and productivity. Stepped structural and financial sector reforms are also critical, to mitigate the adverse impact of consolidation on economic growth. Planned fiscal adjustment should be supported by the revised fiscal rule. In response to the outbreak of the pandemic, the authorities have temporarily suspended the fiscal rule. They intend to revise and re- launch it in 2022, using the nonoil primary balance and debt-to-GDP targets to anchor fiscal policies. Public financial management reforms, including of the medium-term fiscal framework, fiscal risk management and transparency, are needed to support the implementation of the rule and its credibility. Establishing a solid track record of the rule implementation is particularly important given its suspension in 2020 during the pandemic, a year after its introduction. Further monetary easing could be considered to support the nascent recovery, especially if downside risks were to materialize. Although CBA has reduced its policy rates since the outbreak of the pandemic, financial conditions remain tighter than when the pandemic started. Despite the de facto peg, low financial integration and a large spread over the Fed rates provide room for further rate cuts. In addition, 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up  can be found here: http://www.IMF.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. following a recent temporary uptick, inflation is projected to remain close to the mid-point of the CBA target range. A gradual move to a more flexible ER regime should be considered in the medium term. The de facto peg has been effective in keeping inflation under control, but as Azerbaijan’s main trading partners have more flexible regimes, maintaining competitiveness is challenging under the peg. A more flexible exchange rate would facilitate adjustment to oil price shocks, reduce adjustment burden on fiscal policy, and support diversification of the economy and market development. The current difference between the de jure flexible exchange rate regime and the de facto pegged one and the framing of policy communication in inflation-targeting terms poses risks to policy credibility and needs to be addressed promptly. More broadly, the external position is deemed to be substantially weaker than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Annex III). Targeted and time-bound plan to phase out exceptional prudential easing introduced in response to the pandemic is needed. The authorities need to balance the risk to bank soundness arising from prematurely phasing out the forbearance measures and the risks from delaying the reversal to credit quality and market discipline. Staff welcomes the recent replacement of a blanket deposit insurance, in place since the previous banking crisis, with a limited guarantee program, a list of regulatory tightening measures that have been already implemented or on the schedule, and the efforts in improving financial stability analysis capacity. In the medium term, strengthening financial oversight of both lenders’ risk- taking activities and borrowers’ credit risk is an important complement that is needed to ensure financial stability and improve access to finance. The authorities should also continue making progress in enhancing the effectiveness of the AML/CFT framework. Impediments to private sector growth and job creation need to be tackled to support private sector development and diversification of the economy. Weak institutions, limited SME access to credit; inefficient labor, product, and service markets; and sizeable skill gaps result in high informality, discourage nonoil FDI and slow productivity growth. Addressing these weaknesses, including by strengthening the governance and anti-corruption frameworks, attending the scarring impact from the pandemic, and pursuing the green agenda envisaged under the Azerbaijan 2030 Priorities, are needed to achieve inclusive and green growth. The recently released national priorities set ambitious goals for social and economic development and would need to be supported by well-designed and consistently implemented policy reforms. Azerbaijan: Selected Economic Indicators Population (2020 est.): 10.06 million Literacy/Poverty rates: 100.0 (2018)/5.4 (2018) Quota (in SDR million): 391.7 Per capita GDP (in US$, 2020): 4,232 Main products and exports: Oil, gas, and fruits. Key export markets: Italy, Turkey, Israel Projections 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Output Real GDP growth (in percent) -4.3 Real non-oil GDP growth (in percent) -2.6 Real oil GDP growth (in percent) -7.0 Employment Unemployment rate (in percent) Prices Consumer price index (period average) General government finances Revenue (including grants, in percent of GDP) 38.6 41.5 33.8 31.7 33.5 Expenditure (in percent of GDP) 33.1 33.3 40.4 37.2 36.5 Current expenditure 19.1 21.6 28.8 27.2 27.6 Capital spending and net lending 14.0 11.7 11.6 10.0 Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) -6.5 -5.6 -3.0 Non-oil primary fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP) -31.7 -27.2 -30.3 -32.1 -30.2 General government gross debt (direct borrowing) 1/ 18.7 17.7 21.4 30.6 31.4 General government gross debt including guarantees 48.2 47.7 54.1 46.0 44.4 Money and credit Broad money (including foreign currency deposits, percentage change) 19.9 Bank credit to the private sector (percentage change) 14.9 15.2 -0.7 Balance of payments Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 12.8 -0.5 Foreign direct investment (in percent of GDP) -1.7 -2.9 -1.8 Gross international reserves (in months of non-oil imports) Exchange rate REER (average, percentage change) Sources: Azerbaijani authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. 1/ Starting in 2021, includes guarantees issued to Aqracredit for its acquisition of distressed assets from the IBA. REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2021 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY ISSUES Context. Azerbaijan faced unprecedented challenges in 2020. The combined COVID-19 and oil price shocks pushed the economy into recession. A sizeable relief package helped cushion the economic impact from this shock, and the economy has started to recover. Yet the medium-term outlook remains subdued. The long-term fiscal position is unsustainable as oil resources are expected to run out by mid-century. The authorities have laid out strategic goals of accelerated yet sustainable socio-economic development over the next decade and are developing policy plans to that end. Policy recommendations. In the near term, an accommodative fiscal stance is appropriate to ensure public health, including vaccine rollout, and support the recovery. Scope for further interest rate cuts exists especially if downside risks materialize. Once the recovery is firmly underway, fiscal consolidation should resume with the goal of sharing exhaustible oil wealth with future generations and strengthening precautionary buffers. Consolidation should be gradual and its composition growth-friendly, to mitigate the adverse impact on the economy and the vulnerable. Redesigning and reintroducing a credible fiscal rule would help reduce fiscal policy procyclicality and improve long-term fiscal sustainability. To strengthen credibility and better anchor policies, the de jure (free floating) and de facto (soft peg) exchange rate regimes should be reconciled. A move to greater exchange rate flexibility would improve resilience and foster market development. Reversing the exceptional prudential easing should proceed carefully. Financial sector reforms should aim at improving competition, developing financial markets, and improving access to finance, and financial sector oversight and risk monitoring need to be strengthened. To diversify the economy away from oil dependence and limit scarring from the pandemic, investment for healthcare, education, and green and digital infrastructure should be prioritized, together with reducing administrative burden and barriers to entry for private business and strengthening governance  and the anti-corruption framework. July 1, 2021