REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2021 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION AND REQUESTS FOR AN ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED FUND FACILITY AND AN ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED CREDIT FACILITY—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA In the context of the 2021 Article IV Consultation and Requests for an Arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility and an Arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release including a statement by the Chair of the Executive Board and summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its December 20, 2021, consideration of the staff report on issues related to the Article IV Consultation and the IMF arrangements. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on December 20, 2021, following discussions that ended on October 15, 2021, with the officials of the Republic of Moldova on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on December 3, 2021. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Debt Sustainability Analysis prepared by the staffs of the IMF and the International Development Association (IDA). A Statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Moldova. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy January 2022 PR 21/392 IMF Executive Board Approves Moldova’s Requests for Arrangements Under Extended Fund Facility and Extended Credit Facility FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE The 40-month program’s objectives are to sustain the post-pandemic recovery, address pressing developmental needs, and strengthen governance and institutional frameworks. The key policy challenge is to design a prudent policy mix to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and pursue developmental objectives without endangering debt sustainability. Structural reforms will aim to address vulnerabilities to improve the rule of law and the anti-corruption framework and strengthen fiscal and financial governance, ultimately accelerating income convergence between Moldova and European peers. Monetary Fund (IMF) approved Moldova’s requests for an economic reform program under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) and Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangements1 today. The approval of these requests enables the disbursement about US$79.8 million (SDR 57.2 million). Total envisaged disbursements under Moldova’s 40-month ECF/EFF arrangements would amount to about US$558.3 million (SDR 400.0 million). The Executive Board today also concluded the 2021 Article IV Consultation with Moldova. A separate press release will follow. Following the Executive Board discussion, Mr. Kenji Okamura, Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, made the following statement: “The Moldovan authorities have made commendable progress in rehabilitating the banking sector and bolstering macro-financial stability. However, the COVID-19 pandemic, drought in 2020, and the ongoing surge in global energy prices, have slowed economic activity, intensified downside risks, and complicated policy making. While emergency financial assistance from international partners helped cushion the pandemic’s economic impact, Moldova remains among the poorest countries in Europe, with long-standing governance and structural weaknesses inhibiting income convergence. Against this backdrop, the IMF- supported programs under the Extended Fund Facility and Extended Credit Facility have three main objectives: first, sustain the post-pandemic recovery; second, address pressing developmental needs, and third, strengthen Moldova’s governance and institutional frameworks. 1 Arrangements under the ECF provide financial assistance that is more flexible and better tailored to the diverse needs of low-income countries (LICs), including in times of crisis (e.g. protracted balance of payments problems). Those under the EFF provide assistance to countries experiencing serious payment imbalances because of structural impediments or slow growth and an inherently weak balance-of-payments position. “The authorities responded quickly to address the negative macro-economic impact of the combined shocks, focusing on urgently needed policies in support of the healthcare system, social assistance programs, and business activity. However, the under-execution of approved COVID-related crisis measures emphasizes the need to address longstanding capacity constraints. A strong policy mix, including a near-term fiscal stance that carefully balances targeted social assistance and development spending, is needed to sustain the recovery. “Recent reforms implemented by the National Bank of Moldova (NBM) and supported by the IMF have proven vital for preserving macro-financial stability during the crisis. Looking ahead, the authorities should continue their efforts to improve the national bank’s policy credibility and effectiveness; bolster financial sector supervision, financial crisis management, and macroprudential frameworks; and strengthen the national bank’s governance, transparency, and accountability. Safeguarding the NBM’s independence remains a critical precondition for its effectiveness and credibility. In addition, addressing significant vulnerabilities in the non- bank financial sector, strengthening the AML/CFT regime, and making decisive progress on asset recovery will be necessary to safeguard macro-financial stability. “As the recovery takes hold, the policy mix will need to evolve to address Moldova’s urgent developmental objectives, including significant infrastructure gaps, and to accelerate income convergence with European peers without endangering debt sustainability. On the fiscal front, improving domestic revenue mobilization, increasing public spending efficiency, decisively addressing fiscal risks emanating from state-owned enterprises, and continuing efforts to improve budget quality and transparency are vital to improve fiscal outcomes and nurture more responsive and impactful fiscal policy. Continued engagement with developmental partners to leverage their expertise and secure needed concessional financing is needed. “The authorities’ ambitious reforms center on addressing Moldova’s longstanding and widespread governance weaknesses and institutional vulnerabilities. The proposed measures—if appropriately sequenced and resolutely implemented—are expected to yield large medium-term gains, unlocking Moldova’s untapped economic potential and accelerating its income convergence with European peers. Robust reform efforts to strengthen the rule of law, reduce corruption, and embrace the independence of key institutions will be instrumental to improving the business environment, fostering competition and innovation, unlocking private investment, curbing brain drain, accelerating human capital accumulation, and increasing productivity.” REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2021 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION AND REQUESTS FOR AN ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED FUND FACILITY AND AN ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED CREDIT FACILITY EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Context. The 2016–20 ECF/EFF helped rehabilitate Moldova’s banking sector, bolstering macro-financial stability. However, the COVID-19 pandemic, drought in 2020, and the ongoing surge in global energy prices, have slowed economic activity, intensified downside risks, and complicated policy making. While emergency financial assistance under a blended RCF/RFI (100 percent of quota) and SDR allocation (US$236 million) helped cushion the pandemic’s impact, Moldova remains among the poorest countries in Europe with long-standing governance and structural weaknesses inhibiting income convergence. Policy discussions and reform priorities. Discussions centered on three policy priorities: (i) sustaining the post-pandemic recovery with an appropriate policy mix, (ii) addressing pressing developmental needs, and (iii) advancing multi-year governance and institutional reforms to rebuild policy buffers and foster rapid, inclusive, and sustainable income growth. These reform priorities—which are closely intertwined with the authorities’ comprehensive reforms under the requested program—focus on macro-critical governance and institutional reforms, in line with the Fund’s governance framework: Fiscal governance through improving spending efficiency, strengthening revenue mobilization, and enhancing fiscal transparency; Financial sector governance through tightening financial oversight, supervision, and regulation as well as strengthening financial safety nets, inclusion, and the AML/CFT framework; Central bank independence and effectiveness of the inflation targeting regime; Rule of law and the anti-corruption framework through legislative reforms and strengthening of national institutions; and December 3, 2021 REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA The regulatory framework through ambitious SOE and energy reforms to reduce fiscal risks, increase productivity, and improve the business environment. Energy crisis. The large spike in imported gas prices exposed Moldova’s vulnerability to regional risks. The authorities’ transparent policy response to safeguard the energy security and address the immediate impacts on households and SMEs is commendable; but the unfolding energy crisis is complicating the policy formulation amidst heightened uncertainty. Program. To support their efforts, and to assist with Moldova’s protracted balance of payments needs, the authorities have requested 40-month arrangements under a blended Extended Fund Facility (EFF)/Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with cumulative access of SDR 400 million (232 percent of quota; of which SDR 133.3 million under the ECF and SDR 266.7 million under the EFF). Risks. Risks to the new program are large given the fragile political setting, the deep-rooted vested interests opposing improvements in economic governance, and significant weaknesses in implementation capacity. Externally, downside risks to the global recovery and spillovers from geopolitical tensions could have negative spillovers for trade, capital, and remittance flows, and complicate prudent policymaking. The proposed prior actions and extensive financial and expert support from international partners will mitigate key upfront risks and signal commitment to ambitious structural reforms.