MONGOLIA 2017 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION AND REQUEST FOR AN EXTENDED ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED FUND FACILITY—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR MONGOLIA In the context of the combined 2017 Article IV Consultation and Request for an Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: Press Releases including a statement by the Chair of the Executive Board and summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its May 24, 2017, consideration of the staff report on issues related to the Article IV Consultation and the IMF arrangement. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on May 24, 2017, following discussions that ended on February 19, 2017, with the officials of Mongolia on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on April 23, 2017. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Staff Supplement updating information on recent developments. A Statement by the Executive Director for Mongolia. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy May 2017 Press Release No. 17/193 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 24, 2017 IMF Executive Board Approves Financial Arrangement for Mongolia extended arrangement under Extended Fund Facility (EFF) for Mongolia in a total amount of SDR 314.5054 million (about US$434.3 million, or 435 percent of quota) to support the country’s economic reform program.1 Other financing partners, including the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank, Japan, and Korea, have also committed to provide budgetary and project support, and the People’s Bank of China has agreed to extend its swap line with the Bank of Mongolia. In sum, the total financing package amounts to about $5.5 billion. The Board’s approval of the arrangement enables the immediate disbursement of an amount equivalent to SDR 27.9560 million (about $38.6 million). The authorities’ program aims to stabilize the economy, restore confidence, and pave the way to economic recovery. A critical pillar of the program is fiscal consolidation, to reduce the pressure on domestic financial markets, stabilize the external position, and restore debt sustainability. The program includes important safeguards to protect the most vulnerable during this period of adjustment as well as institutional reforms to make sure the fiscal adjustment is durable. Another pillar of the program is a comprehensive effort to rehabilitate the banking system and strengthen the Bank of Mongolia. A broad set of structural reforms is designed to support private-sector led growth. The Executive Board also concluded the 2017 Article IV consultation with Mongolia today. A separate press release will be issued shortly. Following the Executive Board’s discussion, Mr. Mitsuhiro Furusawa, Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, issued the following statement: “Mongolia was hit hard by the sharp decline of commodity prices and the slowdown in key export markets. Efforts to mitigate these shocks through expansionary policies were unsuccessful and resulted in unsustainable public debt, falling international reserves, and lower growth. “Against this background, the Mongolian authorities are implementing a program to maintain macroeconomic stability, pave the way to economic recovery, and protect the most vulnerable during the adjustment process. Fiscal consolidation is a critical element of this 1 The dollar amount is calculated based on the SDR-dollar rate of May 24, 2017 program, including cuts of non-essential expenditures, a move to progressive taxation, pension and public financial management reforms, and steps to strengthen and better target the social safety net. A number of structural fiscal reforms, including an independent fiscal council, will help to bolster budget discipline. Sizable fiscal adjustment, coordinated concessional external financing from development partners, and continued engagement with private creditors will help restore debt sustainability and rebuild international reserves. The commitment to a market-determined exchange rate will strengthen the economy’s resilience to external shocks, supported by prudent monetary policy and the program’s favorable impact on confidence and private sector capital flows. A new central bank law is envisaged to strengthen the governance and independence of the Bank of Mongolia. In addition, implementation of a comprehensive strategy would rehabilitate the banking sector, improve the supervisory and regulatory framework, and strengthen the AML/CFT regime. The program also includes structural reforms to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. These reforms aim to improve the business environment, promote economic diversification, and encourage foreign direct investment. “Determined implementation will be critical to the success of the program. Together with Mongolia’s development partners, the IMF will assist the authorities in their effort with an arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility.” ANNEX Recent Economic Developments With minerals accounting for up to 90 percent of total exports, the sharp drop in commodity prices from 2011 onward severely affected the balance of payments and fiscal position. Macroeconomic policy easing to buffer the economy from external shocks supported growth for a while, but at the cost of increasing public debt, weakening the balance of payments, and reducing banks’ asset quality. By end-2016, the large fiscal deficit and the depreciation of the currency together pushed general government debt up to nearly 90 percent of GDP. The authorities recognized these economic difficulties and prepared an “Economic Recovery Program” that would largely reverse past policies. They also approached the Fund for assistance. Program Summary The authorities’ program supported by the extended arrangement aims to stabilize the economy, restore confidence, and pave the way to economic recovery. A critical pillar of the program is fiscal consolidation to reduce the pressure on domestic financial markets, stabilize the external position, and restore debt sustainability. The program also lays the foundation for sustainable, inclusive growth in the future. To end the boom-bust cycles of the past, the reform program will: (i) discipline fiscal policy; (ii) improve the central bank’s independence, governance, and focus on core responsibilities; (iii) strengthen the financial sector; (iv) foster economic diversification and inclusive growth; and (v) protect the most vulnerable in society. Fiscal Policy. The fiscal adjustment, combined with the projected growth recovery, a gradual normalization of domestic yields, and the authorities’ access to concessional financing under the program, is expected to restore debt sustainability. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies. A new Bank of Mongolia (BOM) law will be adopted to clarify the BoM’s mandate and strengthen its governance and autonomy. The monetary stance will need to remain tight for the time being, and the exchange rate flexible. Financial Sector reforms. As a first step, the authorities will undertake a comprehensive diagnosis of the banking system to assess institutions’ financial soundness and resilience. This will be followed by recapitalization and restructuring as needed. The regulatory and supervisory framework will be strengthened. Growth-enhancing structural reforms. Given the country’s large mineral resources, mining will always be a key sector for the economy, but agribusiness and tourism have strong  potential as well. The program includes structural reforms to promote economic diversification and improve competitiveness. Social protection. The program includes important safeguards to protect the vulnerable groups, and gives priority to health and education. For instance, the savings from better targeting the Child Money Program will be used entirely to increase spending on the food stamp program for the most vulnerable. Program financing. Other international partners also plan to support the government’s program: the Asian Development Bank (ADB), World Bank, and bilateral partners including Japan and Korea are together expected to provide up to $3 billion in budget and project support; and the People’s Bank of China is expected to extend its RMB 15 billion swap line with the Bank of Mongolia for at least another three years. Press Release No. 17/198 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 31, 2017 IMF Executive Board Concludes 2017 Article IV Consultation for Mongolia the 2017 Article IV Consultation1 with Mongolia. Mongolia’s longer-term prospects are promising given its large natural resources. In recent years, however, the economy has faced substantial challenges, as external shocks and expansionary fiscal and monetary policies have compounded structural weaknesses. The new government that took office in 2016 has expressed a strong commitment to strengthen macro policies and implement structural reforms in order to stabilize the economy and lay the basis for sustainable, inclusive growth in the future. Mongolia remains heavily exposed to external shocks, given its export profile, and a key challenge will be to avoid the boom-bust cycles of the past. The discussions thus focused on improving the fiscal framework and strengthening policy discipline, complemented by structural reforms to boost diversification and competitiveness and by efforts to strengthen and better target the social safety net. Executive Board Assessment2 Executive Directors noted that Mongolia had been hit hard by the fall in commodity prices and a slowdown in key export markets. Efforts to offset the impact of these external shocks through expansionary policies had proved unsustainable, leading to large fiscal deficits, high and rising debt and a fall in international reserves. Directors commended the new government for a strong commitment to restore stability and lay the foundations for sustained, rapid, and inclusive growth through sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, as reflected in its Economic Recovery Plan. Coordinated financial assistance from development partners, sizeable fiscal adjustment and continued engagement with private creditors will help restore debt sustainability as envisaged under the program to be supported by the IMF’s Extended Fund Facility Arrangement. 1 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. 700 19th Street, NW Directors stressed that fiscal consolidation and discipline are central to regaining durable debt sustainability. They supported plans to reduce non-essential expenditures, and increase tax revenues and pension contributions. Directors supported the commitment to implement the rules- based fiscal framework, including an end to quasi-fiscal operations of the Bank of Mongolia and the Development Bank of Mongolia, and the establishment of an independent fiscal council. They welcomed plans to strengthen public financial management and tax administration, and tighten the framework for public-private partnerships. Directors underlined the need to enhance the social safety net, strengthen the pension system, and improve program targeting to protect the most vulnerable sections of society. Directors underscored that monetary policy should remain appropriately tight to contain inflationary pressures, even as there will be room to lower the policy rate from the current high level if inflation remains low and confidence is restored. The exchange rate should remain flexible and market-determined with intervention limited to addressing disorderly market conditions. Directors stressed the need to strengthen the banking system through special audits and recapitalization of banks as well as upgrades to the regulatory and supervisory framework. Directors welcomed steps, including the new Bank of Mongolia law, to strengthen the independence and governance of the central bank. The renewed focus on implementing an effective anti-money laundering framework would help attract foreign investment. Directors emphasized the need to promote inclusive growth through a focus on sustainable mining, economic diversification, and further regional integration. In addition, structural reforms should aim to improve the business climate, address supply-side bottlenecks, and deepen access to finance.