ROMANIA 2017 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR ROMANIA Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. In the context of the 2017 Article IV consultation with Romania, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its May 22, 2017 consideration of the staff report that concluded the Article IV consultation with Romania. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on May 22, 2017, following discussions that ended on March 17, 2017, with the officials of Romania on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on May 4, 2017. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Staff Supplement updating information on recent developments. A Statement by the Executive Director for Romania. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy May 2017 Press Release No. 17/191 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 25, 2017 IMF Executive Board Concludes Article IV Consultation with Romania and Ex-Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access Under the 2013 Stand-By Arrangement the Article IV consultation1 with Romania. Romania saw strong economic growth in 2016, resulting in a closed output gap. Private consumption was boosted by an expansionary and pro-cyclical fiscal policy and wage increases. The cyclically adjusted budget deficit grew by 1½ percent of GDP in 2016, reflecting large tax rate cuts and wage increases. Headline inflation remained subdued due to indirect tax cuts, administrative price adjustments, and low euro area inflation and oil prices. There has been welcome progress in reducing banking sector non-performing loans. Growth is expected to reach 4.2 percent in 2017—supported by continued stimulus to private consumption from a new round of fiscal relaxation and wage increases—and to moderate to 3½ percent in the medium term. A reorientation of policies—from stimulating consumption to supporting investment—is required to reduce poverty, raise medium term growth, and accelerate the pace of convergence towards the EU’s income level. The main risks to the economic outlook include a perception of weakening fiscal prudence or institutions, which could adversely affect market confidence. This, together with heightened political tensions, could erode consumption and investment, increase the cost of government borrowing and put pressure on the exchange rate which would affect banks’ balance sheets through their FX exposures. Maintaining adequate reserve levels, a flexible exchange rate, and fiscal buffers will help against such risks. Prudent economic policies and visible steps to accelerate the pace of structural reforms and improve governance would send a powerful signal about Romania as a good place for doing business. The Executive Board also discussed an ex post evaluation of the precautionary SBA with Romania approved in September 2013. The ex post evaluation finds that while policy 1 Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. 700 19th Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA objectives under the program were broadly appropriate, and some progress was achieved, setbacks on key structural reforms and concerns about the quality of fiscal measures prevented program completion. The report also includes recommendations for the design of future Fund programs. Executive Board Assessment Executive Directors welcomed Romania’s progress in reducing economic imbalances after the global financial crisis. Growth has been robust in recent years and unemployment has declined. Directors noted, however, that the recent deterioration in fiscal policies and a weakened pace of structural reforms could threaten these gains. Against this background, they underscored the need for a reorientation of policies from stimulating consumption towards supporting investment to protect buffers and sustainably raise living standards. While observing that Romania’s public debt is relatively low, Directors highlighted that the recent and projected fiscal expansion is not warranted by the economy’s cyclical position. Successive tax cuts have reduced revenues while the share of wages and pensions has grown at the cost of investment. Directors underscored that additional measures would be needed to keep the fiscal deficit below the authorities’ target of 3 percent of GDP in 2017. Directors noted that the unified wage bill and further tax cuts pose risks to the fiscal balance. They called for targeting a medium-term deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP to protect buffers and gradually reduce public debt. Directors emphasized the need to avoid further tax cuts, moderate pension increases, and carefully assess and modify the planned unified wage law in line with available fiscal space and the medium-term fiscal objectives. They encouraged efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the public sector. These include strengthening revenue administration, enhancing expenditure efficiency, and strengthening transparency and commitment controls for local investment programs. Directors noted that there has been some progress with structural reforms. They emphasized the need to reenergize the reform momentum to secure faster convergence with the EU. Priority should be given to improving the performance of state-owned enterprises, including by restarting the privatization and restructuring program, and fully implementing the corporate governance law. Directors also called for stronger efforts to strengthen public investment management institutions to fully utilize EU funds and improve the quality of domestically-financed public investment. Recognizing progress made in the fight against corruption, Directors encouraged the authorities to maintain the momentum. Directors encouraged the central bank to remain vigilant to rising inflationary pressures and to consider tightening monetary conditions. They recommended supporting higher market rates by narrowing the interest rate corridor and absorbing excess liquidity. This would lay the groundwork for a subsequent policy rate hike. Directors commended the significant reduction in nonperforming loans and underscored the need for continued efforts to reduce them further, especially for corporate loans. They welcomed the decisions of the Constitutional Court which have lessened threats to financial stability. Directors called for close monitoring of the growing exposure of banks to households and government debt and taking steps to mitigate emerging risks. Directors broadly agreed with the conclusions of the ex post evaluation of the precautionary SBA approved in September 2013. They noted that while policy objectives under the program were broadly appropriate and some progress was achieved, setbacks on key structural reforms and concerns about the quality of fiscal measures prevented program completion. Directors considered that the EPE on Romania held some potentially useful lessons for the design of future Fund programs, including the need to pay close attention to political economy and capacity constraints, prioritization and sequencing of reforms, and private sector balance sheets and their role in the financing of the economy. Romania: Selected Economic Indicators Population: 19.8 million (2015) Per capita GDP: US$8,956 (2015) Quota:   1,811 million SDRs (0.4% of total) Literacy rate:  99.3% Key export markets: European Union (Germany, Italy, France) People at risk of poverty: 37.3% (2015) Main products and exports: Machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods 2015 2016 2017 2018 Prel. Proj. Output Real GDP growth (%) Output gap -1.2 Employment Unemployment (%) Prices CPI inflation (%, period average) -0.6 -1.6 General government finances Revenue 32.8 29.0 29.1 29.3 Expenditure 34.3 31.4 32.7 33.1 Fiscal balance -1.5 -2.4 -3.7 -3.9 Primary balance -0.2 -1.1 -2.3 -2.5 Structural fiscal balance 1/ -0.5 -2.3 -3.8 -3.9 Public debt (including guarantees) 39.4 39.1 40.5 41.7 Money and credit Broad money (% change) Credit to the private sector (% change) Policy rate (percent) 2/ 1.75 1.75 Balance of payments Current account (% GDP) -1.2 -2.3 -2.7 -2.5 FDI (% GDP) -1.8 -2.3 -2.2 -2.1 Reserves (months imports) External debt (% GDP) 56.5 54.6 52.9 49.8 Exchange rate REER (% change) -0.8 Sources: Romanian authorities, World Bank, Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Fiscal balance (cash basis) adjusted for the automatic effects of the business cycle and one-off effects. 2/ For 2016, latest available data. ROMANIA STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2017 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY ISSUES Background. Romania strengthened its economy considerably after the global financial crisis. Growth has been solid and unemployment low. Public debt and fiscal and current account imbalances are moderate compared to many emerging markets. Notwithstanding this progress, significant challenges remain and the momentum of progress in policies has waned. Income convergence with the EU has slowed and poverty is among the highest in the EU. Successive tax cuts and wage increases in excess of productivity gains have supported consumption, but investment remains weak. A reorientation of policies to prioritize investment will more sustainably achieve the authorities’ objective of bringing more Romanians into the middle class. Outlook and risks. The projected procyclical fiscal stance will provide a temporary boost to consumption and growth. However, absent structural reforms to support higher investment, growth is expected to moderate in the medium term. Underlying inflation is expected to gradually rise. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside due to expected pressures on the budget and challenges in accelerating structural reforms. Policy recommendations. Fiscal policy. Maintain a broadly neutral stance for this year. Avoid expansionary policies—for example, excessive wage and pension increases and further tax cuts. Build stronger policy buffers by lowering the deficit to 1½ percent of GDP by 2020. Support this adjustment through fiscal structural reforms to reprioritize investment over consumption and improve the efficiency of public administration. Monetary policy. Maintain the policy rate for now but remain vigilant against rising inflationary pressures. Bring short-term market rates closer to the policy rate by absorbing excess liquidity and narrowing the interest rate corridor. Financial sector. Sustain the progress in cleaning up banks’ balance sheets and closely monitor credit market developments to help foster prudent credit expansion. Structural reforms. Improve the quality of public investment (through better absorption of EU funds and improved governance of state-owned enterprises) and support private investment (through improving public administration and the functioning of labor markets). Sustain recent progress in the fight against corruption. May 4, 2017