ROMANIA 2018 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR ROMANIA Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. In the context of the 2018 Article IV consultation with Romania, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its June 4, 2018 consideration of the staff report that concluded the Article IV consultation with Romania. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on June 4, 2018, following discussions that ended on March 16, 2018, with the officials of Romania on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on May 3, 2018. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Staff Supplement updating information on recent developments. A Statement by the Executive Director for Romania. The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy June 2018 Press Release No. 18/220 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE June 6, 2018 IMF Executive Board Concludes Article IV Consultation with Romania the Article IV consultation1 with Romania. Romania recorded strong economic growth in 2017, with record low unemployment and an improving financial sector. Private consumption boosted by fiscal stimulus and wage increases led the strong growth, while investment lagged and structural reforms slowed. Public investment fell to a multi-year low in percent of GDP with a low absorption of EU funds. Both the government deficit and current account deficit widened, respectively to 2.8 and 3.4 percent of GDP in 2017. Reflation is quickly gathering pace. While the National Bank of Romania’s inflation target was met in 2017, headline inflation has risen since January above the upper end of the band, reaching 5.2 percent (y/y) in April 2018. Growth is expected to reach 5 percent in 2018—led again by continuing stimulus to private consumption from fiscal relaxation—and accompanied by a current account deficit and elevated inflation, even as monetary policy is tightened. Growth is expected to moderate to 3 percent in the medium term as the transitory effects of the fiscal stimulus fade, and lagging investment and lack of sustained progress on structural reforms would constrain potential growth over the medium term. With signs of overheating, there is a risk that the current policy trajectory increases macroeconomic volatility, undermines the capacity to withstand adverse shocks, and eventually slows down convergence toward the advanced EU countries. The main external risks to the economic outlook include an abrupt shift in global risk appetite against the backdrop of continued monetary policy normalization. Domestically, further deterioration in 1 Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. 700 19th Street, NW fiscal and external balances or a weakening of institutions could disrupt investor confidence. External and domestic shocks could coincide and weaken confidence and capital flows. Maintaining Romania’s adequate reserve levels, fiscal buffers and a flexible exchange rate would help against these risks. Executive Board Assessment2 Executive Directors welcomed the robust growth, reduced unemployment and improved financial sector conditions. Directors raised, however, concerns about emerging signs of overheating, including higher inflation and twin deficits, as well as lagging investment and slower structural reforms. Against this background, they called for a tighter macro-economic policy stance, while strengthening the medium-term orientation and predictability of policies to sustain Romania’s convergence to higher living standards within the EU. Directors noted that a more cautious fiscal policy stance would help economic rebalancing and reduce the burden on monetary policy. In the context of strong economic growth, they recommended a fiscal target below the 2018 Budget target of 3 percent of GDP, and noted that additional fiscal measures would likely be needed to reach this target. Directors encouraged fiscal reforms to ensure achievement of Romania’s medium-term budgetary objective. They emphasized the need to avoid further tax cuts, moderate wage and pension increases, and review the implementation of the unified wage law and pension changes in line with available fiscal space and medium-term fiscal objectives. Directors stressed the importance of reforms to enhance the efficiency of the public sector by strengthening tax administration to improve tax collection efficiency, raising expenditure efficiency through expenditure reviews and centralizing procurement, and improve EU Funds absorption. Directors supported the monetary tightening that had been undertaken to curb inflation. They encouraged the central bank to remain vigilant and pursue further policy tightening as necessary to anchor inflation expectations to the targeted level. The central bank should continue to manage liquidity conditions to enhance monetary transmission. Directors emphasized the need to accelerate the structural reform momentum. They called for improving public investment management institutions to fully utilize EU funds and address large infrastructure needs. Directors emphasized the need for strong corporate governance in the state-owned enterprises. They also noted that the minimum wage mechanism should balance social and competitiveness concerns. Recognizing past progress made in the fight 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. against corruption, Directors encouraged the authorities to maintain the reform momentum. Directors noted the improvements in the financial sector in recent years and the findings of the FSAP. They called for strengthened macroprudential policies to address emerging vulnerabilities from the exposure of banks to the government and the real estate sector. They supported enhancing supervisory practices and the crisis management framework. Romania: Selected Economic Indicators Population: 19.6 million (2017) Per capita GDP: US$10,782 (2017) Quota:   1,811 million SDRs (0.4% of total) Literacy rate:  99% People at risk of poverty: 38.8% (2016) Key export markets: European Union (Germany, Italy, France) Main products and exports: Machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods 2016 2017 2018 2019 Prel. Proj. Output Real GDP growth (%) Output gap -1.5 Employment Unemployment (%) Prices CPI inflation (%, period average) -1.6 General government finances Revenue 29.0 27.9 28.0 28.6 Expenditure 31.4 30.8 31.6 32.0 Fiscal balance -2.4 -2.8 -3.6 -3.4 Primary balance -1.1 -1.7 -2.3 -2.1 Structural fiscal balance 1/ -1.7 -3.4 -4.2 -3.9 Public debt (including guarantees) 39.0 36.8 37.3 38.4 Money and credit Broad money (% change) 11.6 Credit to the private sector (% change) Policy rate (percent) 1.75 1.75 Balance of payments Current account (% GDP) -2.1 -3.4 -3.7 -3.7 FDI (% GDP) -2.7 -2.4 -2.4 -2.4 Reserves (months imports) External debt (% GDP) 54.7 49.7 48.8 47.1 Exchange rate REER (% change, GDP-deflator based) Sources: Romanian authorities, World Bank, Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Fiscal balance (cash basis) adjusted for the automatic effects of the business cycle and one-off effects. ROMANIA STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2018 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY ISSUES Background and Risks Romania posted one of the highest growth rates in the EU in 2017, with record-low unemployment and an improving financial sector. Domestic consumption supported by fiscal stimulus led the strong growth, while investment lagged and structural reforms slowed. Economic growth is expected to again exceed potential in 2018 with elevated inflation, but slow down over the medium term assuming the fiscal stimulus wanes. With signs of overheating, however, there is a risk that the current policy trajectory increases macroeconomic volatility, wears down buffers, and ultimately slows down convergence toward the advanced EU countries. Investor confidence in Romania could be disrupted by further deterioration in fiscal and external balances, weakening of institutions, or global financial volatility. Policy Recommendations Fiscal policy. Pursue a tighter fiscal stance than envisaged in the authorities’ current plans in order to stabilize the economy, rebuild room for fiscal policy maneuver, and preserve competitiveness. Implement fiscal structural reforms to strengthen tax collections and improve the efficiency of public spending and administration. Monetary policy. Frontload interest rate increases to curb inflationary pressures and anchor expectations, while absorbing excess liquidity to strengthen monetary policy transmission. Calibrate monetary tightening to the degree of fiscal adjustment. Structural reforms. Strengthen public investment management institutions and governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), including to use EU funds more effectively and raise the quality of infrastructure. Sustain the fight against corruption. Financial sector. Further strengthen macroprudential tools to limit banks’ mortgage exposure and ensure adequate capital buffers against large sovereign exposures, maintain a focus on non-performing loans reduction, and further improve supervisory practices. May 3, 2018