REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN 2017 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE AND STAFF REPORT Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. In the context of the 2017 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its November 3, 2017 consideration of the staff report that concluded the Article IV consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on November 3, 2017, following discussions that ended on June 1, 2017 with the officials of the Republic of Tajikistan on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on October 18, 2017 A Debt Sustainability Analysis prepared by the staffs of the IMF and the International Development Association. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. The documents listed below will be separately released. Selected Issues The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy September 2021 Press Release No. 17/429 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE November 9, 2017 IMF Executive Board Concludes 2017 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan concluded the Article IV consultation1 with the Republic of Tajikistan. In the past few years economic activity in Tajikistan was strong, despite large external shocks that weakened the external position and exposed vulnerabilities. While remittances declined by 45 percent in nominal USD terms in 2015-16, real GDP growth was 6-7 percent supported by an expansionary fiscal policy that boosted investment in construction and industry and informal sector activity. Inflation remained low. The current account deficit widened from 2.8 percent in 2014 to 6 percent of GDP in 2015 before narrowing to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2016. End-2016 reserves provided 2.3 months of import cover. Public debt increased to nearly 42 percent of GDP. The sharp decline in remittances resulted in a large depreciation against the dollar, which in turn led to a significant escalation in banking sector stress owing to short open foreign exchange (FX) positions and FX lending to unhedged borrowers. By end-2016, nonperforming loans (overdue more than 30 days) in the banks rose to 54 percent, profitability fell, capital adequacy deteriorated and the two largest banks became insolvent and illiquid. Private sector credit declined in 2016. Following robust growth in 2016, the macroeconomic outlook for Tajikistan is expected to be generally weaker this year and beyond. Growth is projected to decrease to 4.5 percent in 2017 and decline further to 4 percent in 2018 due to fiscal consolidation and credit contraction. Banks have made progress in reducing nonperforming loans to 48.8 percent at end-September. The 1 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. 700 19th Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA authorities target a decline in the overall budget deficit (including the Public Investment Program and excluding bank recapitalization) of two percentage points of GDP, mainly by reining in capital spending. Staff projects a higher budget deficit mostly due to the need for additional bank recapitalization. The external current account deficit is projected to widen to 6.3 percent of GDP, reflecting the liquidity created by the bank recapitalization and imports for a large energy project. Risks stem from potential delays in structural reforms, particularly in the banking sector or state- owned enterprises, which would hurt confidence and have an adverse impact on growth. Slower growth in emerging markets would reduce remittances, loans, and FDI. Tajikistan’s risk of external debt distress has increased from low to high suggesting heightened fiscal vulnerabilities to adverse shocks. Executive Board Assessment2 Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the authorities’ response to external shocks since 2014, including allowing exchange rate flexibility and convergence, containing the government wage bill, raising the liquidity support interest rate, implementing measures to preserve financial stability, and accumulating international reserves. Nevertheless, they noted that the Tajik economy continues to face vulnerabilities, which requires maintaining a prudent macroeconomic policy stance, building fiscal and external buffers, and stepping up reforms, especially in the banking sector. Directors welcomed the steps taken by the authorities to repair the financial sector and strengthen banking supervision, but stressed that more decisive action is needed to address longstanding weaknesses in the sector. They noted that the bailout of the two large banks has appropriately been complemented with rehabilitation plans to improve their financial positions, and that two of the smaller banks that were determined to be unviable were liquidated. Nonetheless, deeper and more urgent reforms are needed, based on an assessment of the banks’ viability. Plans to resolve these banks should be time-bound, protect the public finances, and ensure equitable treatment of creditors. Directors stressed that legislation on bank resolution and emergency liquidity assistance needs to be strengthened, and weaknesses in other banks should be addressed promptly to help ensure financial stability and maintain depositor confidence. Directors called for a careful implementation of fiscal and monetary policy to ensure macroeconomic stability. They emphasized that fiscal consolidation and concessional financing would reduce the risk of debt distress and help rebuild policy space. Expansion of the tax base and cuts in non-priority expenditure while protecting critical social outlays will be important. 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. Disciplined implementation of the 2017 budget would be a welcome start to this consolidation. Directors also noted that a further tightening of monetary policy, including limiting the use of central bank credit to finance public investment projects, would help contain inflationary pressures. Directors agreed that sustained and strong implementation of structural reforms, accompanied by prudent macroeconomic policies, would result in higher and more job-rich growth in the medium term. Maintaining exchange rate flexibility and strengthening the monetary policy framework will help support competitiveness, while paving the way for a transition to inflation targeting. Directors underscored that ambitious reforms to improve bank governance and performance, upgrade the financial regulatory and supervisory framework, clarify the tax code and tax administration, enhance SOE oversight and accountability, boost the efficiency of public spending, create a better business environment, and bolster anti-corruption efforts would lift growth significantly over the medium term. Directors also encouraged further development of Tajikistan’s AML/CFT framework. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan will be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Table 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2014–22, Baseline (Quota: SDR 174 million) (Population: 8.7 million; 2016) (Per capita GDP: US$799; 2016) (Poverty rate: 31 percent; 2015) (Main exports: aluminum, gold, cotton; 2016) REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2017 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY ISSUES Context and background. Tajikistan is the poorest of the eight Central Asian and Caucasus countries. Economic growth has been high and funded by inward remittances, but poverty remains significant. Macroeconomic policies were generally prudent before the external shocks (lower oil and commodity prices and weaker growth in trading partners) in 2015-16, but slow progress in structural reforms constrained diversification and employment generation. External shocks (through lower remittances and currency depreciation) and an inadequate policy response weakened the external position, exposed major weaknesses in the banking system, and contributed to a rise in public debt. Program discussions held in 2016 were not concluded. While the authorities launched a bank recapitalization plan in December 2016 to maintain depositor confidence and financial stability, additional banking sector reforms are needed. Focus and principal issues. The near-term macroeconomic outlook is challenging. Growth will be constrained as the external outlook remains uncertain, external and fiscal buffers need to be rebuilt, and monetary space has been used. Risks are mostly on the downside. To generate inclusive growth, Tajikistan needs to combine prudent macro policies with accelerated reform to increase investment and growth. Macro policies will need to limit debt accumulation and maintain a flexible exchange rate with prudent monetary policy to limit inflation. Strong reforms are essential to improve banking sector governance and performance, strengthen fiscal institutions and oversight of state-owned enterprises, develop the monetary policy framework and communications, and enhance the business environment. The authorities intend to resume program discussions and are working to this end. October 18, 2017