UKRAINE 2023 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION, SECOND REVIEW UNDER THE EXTENDED ARRANGEMENT UNDER THE EXTENDED FUND FACILITY, AND REQUESTS FOR MODIFICATION OF PERFOMRANCE CRITERIA AND A WAIVER OF NONOBSERVANCE OF PERFORMANCE CRITERION—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR UKRAINE In the context of the Staff Report for the 2023 Article IV Consultation, Second Review Under the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility, and Requests for Modification of Performance Criteria and A Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criterion, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release including a statement by the Chair of the Executive Board. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on December 11, 2023, following discussions that ended on November 10, 2023, with the officials of Ukraine on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on December 4, 2023. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Statement by the Executive Director for Ukraine. The documents listed below have been or will be separately released. Selected Issues The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org December 2023 PR23/433 IMF Executive Board Concludes the 2023 Article IV Consultation and the Second Review under the Extended Fund Facility Arrangement for Ukraine FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE The IMF Board today concluded the 2023 Article IV consultation and completed the Second Review of the extended arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) for Ukraine, allowing the authorities to draw the equivalent of about US$900 million (SDR 663.9 million), which will be channeled for budget support. The authorities have made strong progress toward their EFF commitments under challenging conditions, meeting all applicable quantitative performance criteria through end-June and indicative targets through end-September and the majority of structural benchmarks through end-October. The Ukrainian economy continues to show remarkable resilience, although the outlook remains subject to exceptionally high war-related uncertainty. Continued strong ownership and reform momentum—including domestic revenue mobilization combined with timely and predictable external financing—are necessary to safeguard macroeconomic stability, enhance institutional reforms, and support reconstruction efforts, while facilitating a green recovery on the path to European Union (EU) accession. Monetary Fund (IMF) today concluded the 2023 Article IV Consultation and completed the Second Review of the EFF arrangement for Ukraine. The completion of the second review enables the authorities to immediately draw an amount of about US$900 million (SDR 663.9 million). Ukraine’s 48-month EFF arrangement, with access of SDR 11.6 billion (equivalent to US$15.6 billion, or about 577 percent of quota), was approved on March 31, 2023, and forms part of a US$122 billion support package for Ukraine. The authorities’ IMF- supported program aims to anchor policies that sustain fiscal, external, price and financial stability at a time of exceptionally high war-related uncertainty, support the economic recovery, as well as enhance governance and strengthen institutions to promote long- term growth in the context of reconstruction and Ukraine’s path to EU accession. The EFF continues to provide a strong anchor for the authorities’ economic program, and its implementation has been broadly on track despite the extremely challenging backdrop. All quantitative performance criteria for end-June and indicative targets for end-September were met. The majority of structural benchmarks for end-October were also met, with the others completed with some delay; this progress underscores the authorities’ continuing commitment to the overall reform agenda. In particular, the authorities have continued to advance their governance and anti-corruption agenda. Despite Russia’s war in Ukraine, macroeconomic indicators have been stronger than expected, contributing to upward revision in the growth outlook. Economic resilience has resulted in better growth outturns, continued sharp disinflation, and a stable FX market, including following the National Bank of Ukraine’s exit from the exchange rate peg, backed by strong reserves. The baseline projection for real GDP growth in 2023 has been revised up to 4.5 percent. Growth is expected to somewhat soften in 2024 to 3–4 percent as the war continues. The outlook remains subject to significant risks related to the exceptionally high uncertainty stemming from the war, potential policy slippages, and delays or shortfalls in external financing. Article IV discussions focused on foundational policies for strong, balanced, and green growth in the post-war era to support Ukraine’s EU accession. The focus was on the appropriate macroeconomic policy frameworks, including the restoration of pre-war monetary and exchange rate policy frameworks, governance reforms, steps to revitalize the banking sector, to mitigate climate change, to help Ukraine achieve a high sustained growth path and raise living standards. Following the Executive Board discussion on Ukraine, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Managing Director of the IMF, issued the following statement: Executive Board Assessment1 Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They emphasized the enormous social and economic impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including its global spillovers. Directors praised the Ukrainian authorities’ skillful policymaking, which, together with substantial external support, has helped preserve macroeconomic and financial stability. Directors welcomed Ukraine’s economic resilience and better-than-expected economic performance. They noted the upgrade to real GDP growth, inflation deceleration, and the stable FX market supported by sizable external financing. Directors however agreed that the exceptionally high war-related uncertainty continues to pose significant risks, that external financing on concessional terms needs to continue to flow on a timely and predictable basis, and that policy slippages should be avoided. Directors welcomed the strong program performance and commitment under the Second Review, with timely completion of most of the structural benchmarks through 1 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.IMF.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. end-October. They also emphasized the importance of parsimonious conditionality. While observing that the program remains fully financed, Directors took note of the higher external financing gaps in the baseline over the four-year program period. Directors called for decisive policy actions to achieve the fiscal targets and lay the foundations for a robust medium-term fiscal path to preserve fiscal and debt sustainability. They stressed the need for mobilizing tax revenues and avoiding erosion of the tax base with a timely launch and implementation of the National Revenue Strategy (NRS) to support reconstruction and social spending, including examining further considerations related to the higher bank profit tax. Reforms to further strengthen the frameworks for medium-term budget preparation, budget credibility, fiscal risks and transparency, and public investment management also remain crucial. Directors emphasized that the planned commercial debt operation consistent with program parameters will be essential to restoring debt sustainability and providing much needed flow relief. They noted that preserving debt sustainability will also require seeking new borrowing on highly concessional terms and delivering a revenue-based medium-term fiscal adjustment. Directors welcomed the National Bank of Ukraine’s successful transition from the exchange rate peg toward a managed exchange rate flexibility regime, which represents an important step in strengthening resilience to external shocks. They agreed that continued evidence of sustained disinflation and stability in the FX cash market could support further easing in monetary policy. Directors observed that although financial stability has been skillfully preserved through comprehensive emergency measures since the onset of war, heightened vigilance and contingency planning are necessary. Key priorities include bank diagnostics and oversight and strengthening governance in state-owned banks. Directors emphasized that steadfast implementation of structural reforms, including in governance, anti-corruption, and public investment management, will be crucial in laying the foundations for strong and sustained growth, and support Ukraine on its path to EU accession. They welcomed recent progress made to restore asset declarations and align the AML/CFT law with the FATF standards, and emphasized the importance of adopting legislation to strengthen the autonomy of the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office (SAPO). Directors also noted that efforts to strengthen the governance of state-owned enterprises should continue, and highlighted the importance of ensuring that mechanisms for managing donor funding are integrated into budget processes. Directors agreed that the extended arrangement for Ukraine continues to satisfy Fund policies governing the Fund’s financing assurances for UCT-lending under exceptionally high uncertainty. They reiterated the need to apply this policy in an evenhanded manner. Ukraine’s program has been designed to achieve its objectives across a range of assumptions about the large-scale war and under two scenarios. Directors noted that the authorities continue to demonstrate the capacity and commitment to implement the program. Directors noted the credible process to restructure private external commercial claims, and the financing assurances on debt relief and concessional financing during and after the program received from official bilateral creditors and donors to support debt sustainability under both the baseline and a downside scenario. Directors also noted that the assurances provided by a significant group of Fund shareholders to the Fund about Ukraine’s capacity to repay supports the needed safeguards for Fund lending. Directors agreed that Ukraine has major upside potential once the war tapers off, depending on policy and reform choices and the availability of financing. Well-managed post-war reconstruction coupled with decisive reforms in the context of the path to EU accession could stimulate the return of migrants and investment flows needed for a sustained, resilient and green recovery, bolstering Ukraine’s broader development goals. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Ukraine will be held in accordance with the Executive Board decision on consultation cycles for members with Fund arrangements.