UNITED STATES 2023 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—PRESS RELEASE; STAFF REPORT; AND STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR THE UNITED STATES Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. In the context of the 2023 Article IV consultation with the United States, the following documents have been released and are included in this package: A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its June 12, 2023 consideration of the staff report that concluded the Article IV consultation with the United States. The Staff Report prepared by a staff team of the IMF for the Executive Board’s consideration on June 12, 2023, following discussions that ended on May 26, 2023, with the officials of the United States on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on May 26, 2023. An Informational Annex prepared by the IMF staff. A Statement by the Executive Director for the United States The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and other documents. Copies of this report are available to the public from Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org  Web: http://www.imf.org Price: $18.00 per printed copy June 2023 PR23/208 IMF Executive Board Concludes 2023 Article IV Consultation with the United States FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation1 with the United States. The U.S. economy has proven resilient in the face of the significant policy tightening that took place in 2022. Consumer demand has held up particularly well, boosted initially by a drawdown of pent-up savings and, more recently, by solid growth in real disposable incomes. Prime age labor force participation has risen above its pre-pandemic peak, the unemployment rate for women and African Americans has fallen to historical lows, and real wages have been rising faster than inflation since mid-2022. Nonetheless, the significant reduction during 2021 in the share of the population living in poverty has largely been unwound, as pandemic benefits have expired and real wage growth for low-income workers has moderated. The strength of demand and in labor market outcomes has contributed to a persistent inflation problem. While goods inflation has moderated and shelter price growth is expected to slow in coming months, nominal wage increases are feeding into non-shelter services prices. Core and headline PCE inflation remain materially above the two percent target of the Federal Reserve. Fiscal policy is expected to be procyclical in 2023 on a general government basis, following a significant fiscal contraction in 2022 due to the unwinding of major pandemic related fiscal measures and higher tax receipts. While the U.S. retains some fiscal space, public debt is well above pre-pandemic levels and is expected to continue to increase over the next decade, as aging-related expenditures on healthcare and social security feed into the debt dynamics. Monetary policy has been assertively tightened. Interest rates have risen by 500bps since March 2022 and are expected to remain at or above the current level well into 2024. The process of shrinking the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet is ongoing. Recent bank failures reflect the challenge of sizable unrealized losses on assets in the rising interest rate environment, while substantial amounts of deposits remain uninsured. Blanket guarantees were extended to depositors at failed banks where the deposit franchise could not be sold. The Federal Reserve provided systemic liquidity support, including a new facility to reduce the need for banks to liquidate assets in times of stress. These actions have stabilized deposit outflows and restored confidence to the banking system. 1 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. Executive Board Assessment2 Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They welcomed the continuing resilience of the U.S. economy in the face of the significant tightening of monetary and fiscal policies in 2022. Directors noted, however, that resilient demand and strong labor market outcomes have contributed to more persistent inflation. Going forward, bringing inflation down remains a priority. Efforts to tackle longer-term issues—including bringing down public debt, and addressing supply-side constraints and decarbonizing the economy while avoiding protectionism—also remain necessary. Directors emphasized that bringing inflation back to target will require an extended period of high interest rates. Nevertheless, Directors also highlighted the potential risks to global activity and financial stability from a prolonged period of tight monetary policy, especially in light of recent bank failures, and careful monitoring will be necessary. Directors stressed the importance of clear communication of the Federal Reserve’s assessment of incoming data and its implication for the path of the policy rate. Directors recognized that in the short term, a tighter fiscal stance would ease some of the burden shouldered by the Federal Reserve in reducing demand and inflation. Over the medium term, more determined action will be needed to put public debt on a decisively downward path, including tax increases and tackling structural imbalances in social security and Medicare. Directors also called for a permanent solution to the debt ceiling. Directors commended the authorities’ prompt response to recent bank failures but observed that the bank failures illustrate the systemic risks posed by even relatively small financial institutions. Directors called for improved stress tests, more stringent requirements for mid- sized banks, including aligning capital and liquidity requirements with the Basel framework, and for a more assertive supervisory stance. Directors encouraged the authorities to address remaining FSAP recommendations. They welcomed their governance and anticorruption efforts in the financial sector, including plans to close gaps in the AML/CFT framework. Directors noted that the U.S. external position remains moderately weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. Noting that “Made in America” policies in recent legislation include provisions that favor goods and services produced in the U.S. or North America, Directors urged the authorities to maintain open trade policies and work to strengthen a rules-based multilateral trading system. Directors welcomed the proposed supply-side policies including expanding access to healthcare and education and incentivizing labor force participation, but recommended that these policies be implemented in a manner that supports a downward path for public debt. Directors welcomed the climate provisions in the Inflation Reduction Act as a means to decarbonize the U.S. economy. They noted that the U.S. climate goals could be achieved without introducing domestic content requirements. They also noted the need for additional efforts to ensure emission reductions reach the U.S. objective, which could include building consensus on carbon pricing. Training and financial support for the most affected workers would facilitate a faster reallocation of labor and lower societal costs of the transition. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with the United States will be held on the standard 12-month cycle. 2 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.IMF.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. United States: Selected Economic Indicators Projections 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 Real GDP (annual growth) Real GDP  (q4/q4) Unemployment rate (q4 avg.) Current account balance (% of GDP) -3.6 -3.7 -2.8 -2.5 -2.4 -2.3 -2.2 -2.2 Fed funds rate (end of period) Ten-year government bond rate (q4 avg.) PCE Inflation (q4/q4) Core PCE Inflation (q4/q4) Federal fiscal balance (% of GDP) -12.3 -5.5 -5.6 -5.7 -6.4 -6.2 -5.9 -6.4 Federal debt held by the public (% of GDP) 98.4 97.0 96.6 98.4 101.2 103.6 105.8 108.3 Sources: BEA; BLS; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. UNITED STATES STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2023 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION KEY MESSAGES Activity and employment. The U.S. economy has proven resilient in the face of the significant tightening of both fiscal and monetary policy in 2022. Consumer demand has held up particularly well, boosted initially by a drawdown of pent-up savings and, more recently, by solid growth in real disposable incomes. Policy restraint is expected to continue to slow the economy in 2023 with a modest pick-up in momentum later in 2024. Unemployment is expected to rise slowly to close to 4½ percent by end-2024. Inflation. Resilient demand and strong labor market outcomes are a double-edged sword that has contributed to more persistent inflation. Goods inflation has moderated and shelter price growth is expected to slow in coming months. However, past nominal wage increases are now feeding into non-shelter service prices. Core and headline PCE inflation are expected to continue falling but will remain materially above the Federal Reserve’s medium-term target throughout 2023 and 2024. Risks to the path for inflation are skewed upwards. Monetary policy. Bringing inflation back to target will require an extended period of tight monetary policy with the federal funds rate remaining at 5¼—5½ percent until late in 2024. Achieving a sustained disinflation will necessitate a loosening of labor market conditions that, so far, has not been evident in the data. If the economy proves less responsive to higher interest rates and/or inflation proves to be even more persistent, the path for the federal funds rate will need to go higher. Given the important uncertainties facing the U.S. economy, it will be essential for the Federal Reserve to communicate carefully how it assesses the incoming data and to provide clear guidance on what this means for the expected path of the policy rate. Greater emphasis should be placed on the need for interest rates to remain at high levels for an extended period of time. Communications should continue to underscore, though, that the FOMC’s forward guidance is not set in stone and actual policy outcomes will depend critically on incoming data. Fiscal policy. On a general government basis, fiscal policy is expected to be procyclical in 2023. With the economy operating well above potential and inflation a persistent problem, there is a strong case for greater fiscal restraint in 2023-24. A tighter fiscal stance would lessen the burden on the Federal Reserve in disinflating the economy. A more significant fiscal adjustment will be required over the medium-term to put public debt on a decisively downward path. Achieving this adjustment will require a broad range of policies including both tax increases (even for those earning less than US$400,000 per year) and addressing structural imbalances in social security and Medicare. The sooner this adjustment is put in place, the better. In addition, the debt May 26, 2023 UNITED STATES ceiling should be immediately raised or suspended by Congress and a more permanent solution should be developed to avoid this recurrent debt limit brinkmanship through institutional changes that ensure that, once appropriations are approved, the corresponding space on the debt ceiling is automatically provided to finance that spending. Protectionism. Over the last few years, global concerns have been raised over the resilience of supply chains, including as relates to national security. In this context, the Inflation Reduction Act, the CHIPS Act, and the Build America, Buy America Act have included provisions that are explicitly designed to favor goods and services produced in the U.S. or in North America. We know from experience that protectionist provisions distort trade and investment and risk creating a slippery slope that will fragment global supply chains and trigger retaliatory actions by trading partners. As such, these “Made in America” policies are ultimately bad for U.S. growth, productivity and labor market outcomes. Financial oversight. Recent bank failures highlight the potential systemic risks posed by even relatively small financial intermediaries. The past few months have focused attention on poor risk management by individual institutions, vulnerabilities created by the regulatory “tailoring” that was put in place in 2018, and inadequate supervisory oversight. They also raise more important questions about the insufficiently assertive stance taken by bank supervisors as well as the effectiveness of the stress tests that were undertaken to identify the extent of bank vulnerabilities and the potential for systemic contagion. Prudential requirements should be made more stringent for mid-sized banks, subjecting them to similar requirements to larger banks, including the annual supervisory stress testing process and aligning their capital and liquidity requirements with the Basel framework. Supply side policies. A range of policies that were proposed in the President’s budget would help address supply side constraints to growth but should be implemented within a fiscal envelope that ensures a downward path for the public debt. These include policies to incentivize labor force participation by expanding the earned income tax credit, providing childcare subsidies, and requiring paid family leave. Human capital would be boosted by investments to expand healthcare coverage and increase access to pre-K and higher education. Continued increases in infrastructure investment—including to increase resilience to climate change—would help raise productivity and competitiveness. There is also scope for a range of tax changes to raise revenue, make the current system more progressive and equitable, and curtail base erosion and profit shifting. Emissions reduction. Policies in the Inflation Reduction Act have the potential to significantly decarbonize the U.S. economy, lowering greenhouse gas emissions by around 36 percent by 2030 (relative to 2005 levels). However, rapid deployment of green energy generating capacity and achieving the full potential of the Act’s measures will hinge on overcoming real-world challenges, such as delays in permitting and electricity transmission siting. Beyond this important policy package, further efforts are needed to ensure emission reductions reach the U.S. objective of a 50– 52 percent decline. Additional steps could include a further tightening of state or federal regulations (including on fuel efficiency standards and the regulation of CO2 emissions from power plants), ensuring that the upcoming reauthorization of the Farm Bill prioritizes changing incentives for carbon intensive agriculture and supports carbon sequestration, and building the necessary social consensus to begin pricing carbon. The U.S.’s very flexible labor markets will be an advantage in facilitating decarbonization. Nonetheless, training and financial support for the most affected workers would facilitate a faster reallocation of labor and lower societal costs of the transition. This would help ensure that reducing emissions garners broad societal support and does not leave behind those communities that are currently reliant on fossil fuels for jobs, activity, and local tax revenue.